This is the Ballantine Science Fiction Hour.
Man. Earth. The universe. Tomorrow. What's in store?
I try to stick to the accurate predictions just because they seem to be more fun.
What I'm really doing is playing the game, and the game is, let's try to predict a valid future.
Larry Niven shared his predictions with avid science fiction audiences for the past 12 years.
Today Mr. Niven explores the roots and accuracy of these predictions with his fellow author Alan Dean Foster,
who has himself gained prominence with such novels as Ice Rigger and his adaptations of TV's Star Trek Adventures,
both published by Ballantine Books.
Larry Niven has a reputation for taking a so-called hard science approach to his writing.
It is best seen in Ringworld, his major novel available from Ballantine,
which won the coveted Hugo and Nebula awards.
Niven is comfortable with this approach and with its results.
I try to stick to the accurate predictions just because they seem to be more fun.
Do you think that any science fiction writer can be labeled or categorized?
Not if he's any good.
Do you resent it when people try to identify you as a hard science writer as opposed to just a science fiction writer?
No, I don't resent it at all, but I retain the right to point out that certain stories don't fit the rule.
The spets stories, for instance, can hardly be labeled hard science fiction.
I see. Do you consciously, when you sit down to write a story, try to predict the future if that's the right word? Predict?
Naturally.
You do.
They call this the game.
It isn't that any science fiction writer thinks he's going to be famous for being the first to point out,
oh, that there is probably a crescent along the pre-done side of Pluto, of condensed atmosphere.
I think this might be the case. It might be true. It might be there.
But what I'm really doing is playing the game.
The game is, let's try to predict a valid future.
Which is more important to you than the possible validity of an imagined development or its importance to the story?
In other words, what I'm trying to get at here is, is it the chance that your prediction, the thing that you're creating, might come true?
The most important thing to you, or is the prediction just being utilized as a plot element in the story?
I multiply the two. I multiply the possibility of its coming true.
Call it the percentage probability of its coming true times the interest.
And if what I get is greater than X, I have a story worth writing. If it's less than X, I don't.
Would you then fudge a little bit on a possible prediction if you thought it would work out well in the story?
Sure. I'll use a faster-than-light spacecraft any time I'm sure I need it.
Without bothering to explain necessarily whether or not you think faster-than-light spacecraft are possible in this particular situation?
That's right.
Maybe you could explain for our listeners what's called in science fiction the one-gimme rule.
The one-gimme rule being that you're allowed as kind of a convention one major scientific development that you don't have to explain in any way, shape, or form.
Do you use this in your own stories or do you really feel...
No, I don't. But I know where it comes from and I admit it's a good way to think.
It's a good way to plan out a story. It drives from uh H.G. Wells.
Wells would take one-gimme and whether it needed explaining or not, he would take it.
And the rest of the world is England of his time and vivid as hell.
When you are creating a future universe, do you see yourself living in it at this time?
In other words, do you exist concurrent with your characters?
Certainly. I've been reading science fiction since I was age 12 and I was reading Grimm's fairy tales before that.
And the Oz books. I think I read every Oz book.
I visualized. In college I read Dante's Inferno and I kept working out sequels in my head on the basis of,
this is great for Dante who has an all-powerful guide who knows it all and can call on angels too when he needs to.
But what about you and me, poor damned souls trying to get out?
I finally got together with Jerry Pournelle and we did write a sequel to Dante's Inferno.
What was that called? That was just published, wasn't it?
It's called Inferno and it isn't quite out. It'll be out in April.
I wonder if Dante would enjoy the sequel.
I think he would. This was our aim. I think we found some places he never thought of.
Alan Dean Foster has made the point that today's science fiction is tomorrow's history.
This is especially true when it comes to mechanical inventions such as one recalled by Larry Niven.
Waldos, as designed by Heinlein for a story called Waldo, turned out to be very useful for manipulating radioactives.
The idea is you've got a rigid, a pair of rigid gloves and as you move your hand,
different hands behind a wall of leaded glass, let us say, make the same motions.
They may be much larger or much smaller. You may be picking a part of molecule with very tiny hands
or you may be lifting thousands of tons in hands big enough to crush your whole body.
This may go further. The Waldos have not been used much except in dealing with atomics behind a leaded glass wall
or a lead wall and mirrors. Picture a Waldo set up with a TV screen and it's in your living room.
After you have breakfast, you go to your living room. You slide your hands into these things
which feel like gloves with a skeleton over the fingers of a metal, let us say.
You've got a wrap around TV screen, 180 degrees and you're working in Florida. You have a job in Florida.
The signals cross country. You do your job in Florida without ever having to drive to work.
Consumption of gas goes down. The Arabs don't have control of us anymore.
And if you got fired in Florida, you mess with the newspapers a bit and wind up with a job in Nebraska tomorrow.
Science fiction has been called the literature of ideas and certainly these predictions spring from an ideological base.
Yet the most important element in successful fiction seems to be the old saw that people are most interested in people.
Do you think that a preoccupation with ideas, with predictions, if you will, has hurt science fiction as literature?
No. It sure hasn't hurt me. By the time I've gotten to writing the story, I am looking out through the main characters' eyes
and probably through several characters' eyes. So there's no question that I'm not interested in the characters.
One of the complaints that was always leveled against science fiction when it was getting started as a popular genre in this country
in the 20s and 30s and 40s was that the stories dealt in great depth with the machinery, with the technological aspect
and kind of ignored the people. Do you think this has changed in recent years?
Oh yeah. And not so much in recent years either. It changed with the founding of the magazine Analog.
Hugo Gernsback had an idea of science fiction stories as a teaching technique.
And later magazines were pulp. The quality of the writing reflects the fact that they were pulp.
You find about the same level of writing on the average in Black Cat magazine as you do in the Hugo Gernsback Amazing.
Just because a story can be used as a teaching technique doesn't mean you can't also make it entertaining.
And usually we work it the other way. Asimov came out with a collection, Where Do We Go From Here?, he called it.
A bunch of stories chosen as teaching techniques and followed by lecture notes and a series of class questions.
But the stories weren't written for that purpose. They were chosen.
Well let's go all the way to the other extreme then. Do you think that science fiction in the last decade or two,
and I'm thinking specifically of such developments as the so-called New Wave,
are so concerned with people that they've tended to forget about the technological aspects?
Yeah. However, the New Wave was a wonderful thing for me.
In what way?
Well, I first started selling stories in 1964, I think.
And at that time, every new writer had turned on to the New Wave and was using it as an excuse for bad writing and no research.
So I had a virtual lock on the field.
That ended fairly rapidly because, not because there's anything wrong with the tenets of the New Wave per se,
but because it makes such a marvelous excuse for bad writing and no research.
So it got dropped, essentially.
In your own work, when you sit down to write a story for the first time, do you begin with creation of characters
or with your future paraphernalia machines or a social system or a scientific premise?
I'm likely to start anywhere. I could give you a number of examples.
Passerby. A short story dealing with a man who gets himself trapped at the edge of the speed of light
when his bizarre ramjet spacecraft breaks down.
He's rescued by something that looks like an enormous golden man walking between the stars.
He spends several months trying to convince himself that it was not God he met or even a God,
but an egotistical, wealthy humanoid who got himself built a spacecraft in his own image.
And then it all gets ruined when he sees something on a sidewalk in a city park on Earth.
But that story started when I saw an insurance advertisement.
An insurance advertisement?
Yes, on TV.
You got a background voice telling you how a certain brand of insurance will protect you.
But what you're watching on the screen is about a six-year-old kid,
toddling along a sidewalk in a park, stops to watch a caterpillar.
There are big feet going past him in both directions.
He studies the situation for a while with that solemn look of a six-year-old.
And then he stoops down and picks up the caterpillar and walks across the lawn
and transfers it to a tree branch.
Okay, that's how one story started.
Another story, "The Fourth Profession".
I'd been thinking for a while about the worm runner thing.
The idea that you can...
The worm runner?
Worm runner.
You train flatworms by running them in mazes.
Then you chop them up and feed them to other flatworms,
and you find that the second group of flatworms learns faster.
Right?
Now, I'm told that this is no longer true.
It turned out to be something like polywaters.
Somebody had made an experimental mistake.
But at the time, it seemed like a great way to learn.
What a pity.
It sounds like you almost rationalized cannibalism there.
Well, I've read a number of good stories that did, of course.
At any rate, it looked good then,
and it looked like I ought to do stories about it,
and I hadn't come up with any.
And then I got this picture.
Bartender.
Alien and bartender.
Bartender gets drunk.
Alien gives him a number of knowledge pills,
choosing them not very carefully.
The picture I started with was the next morning,
when the bartender wakes up with the opposite of a hangover,
virtually anchored to the universe.
He's been fed a teleportation pill designed for another species.
He can't teleport because the mechanism isn't there in his brain,
but he does have the power of total location that came with it.
He knows exactly where he is, velocities.
He could probably walk to New York blindfold all the way.
I started that with no idea where the story was going.
I just thought it would be fun.
While science fiction is credited with initiating
a number of scientific developments which have later come true,
in several of these cases, the actual science involved in such predictions was minimal.
What about Larry Niven's award-winning novel, Ringworld?
How did his concept for an artificial world built around its own sun
grow out of a scientific premise?
It started for me with the Dyson sphere,
and I ought to make a distinction here.
A Dyson shell is what Dyson the mathematician invented.
It wasn't all his invention.
It came from Ciel Koski, I think, who suggested that we could get enormous living area,
millions of times as much living area,
if we would break up the planets of the solar system
and hollow them out as living space,
terraform that is spread soil and water across the inner surfaces,
spin the things to provide gravity,
and presently you've got trillions of these little bubble worlds circling the sun,
instead of nine largely useless planets.
OK, Dyson's contribution was, he pointed out
what one of these things would look like from another star,
from let us say Earth.
We would see not a solar-type star,
but an infrared source pouring out as much energy as a solar-type star.
We wouldn't need Project Ozma,
we wouldn't need people actually trying to communicate with us.
All we need to do is find a Dyson shell.
It doesn't matter what the shell is made of, by the way.
It could be bubble worlds, it could be a fluid, it could be a solid,
it could be discontinuous.
Somebody took a logical jump and started talking about Dyson spheres.
Dyson sphere is essentially a ping pong ball,
an enormous ping pong ball, with a star inside it.
93 million miles in radius, let us say.
You spread soil and water across the inside,
and radiating fins on the outside if you need them,
and certainly you need gravity generators.
Because spinning a Dyson shell, spinning a Dyson sphere doesn't do anything.
It makes a terraformable area around the equator,
and it's not very wide.
I looked at Dyson spheres without really going into it,
and I thought I can design it, I can design better than that.
And I designed the Ringworld.
I did use the technical books,
and in fact I got the wrong formula for centrifugal force,
and almost used a much higher speed for the spin of the Ringworld than I needed.
But I designed it all,
and in fact the design now in my head includes a couple of things that aren't even in Ringworld.
I've gotten lots of interesting letters from people who read Ringworld
and did the mathematics, and made slight design changes.
Like you need attitude jets.
It turns out that the Ringworld is unstable in the plane.
It'll slide off balance to the Sun,
and eventually the Sun will be scraping the inside if you don't correct it.
At any rate, you need the attitude jets.
There's something else you need.
You need a way to get the soil in the bottom of the oceans back to the tops of the mountains.
Otherwise all the topsoil will wind up in the bottom of the oceans, eventually.
What do you think, Larry, of the record of prediction in science fiction over the past half century?
Do you think it's been good?
Do you think it shows signs of becoming more accurate than it used to be?
Believe it or not, I haven't checked.
Becoming more accurate than it used to be?
Yeah, I think so, because the people writing today, even the older writers, know more,
and the new writers are expected to know more, so they see to it that they do.
Yeah, we get better predictions because we writers know more than we used to.
And you also mentioned the comments that people sent you on Ringworld,
for example, the mathematics of the Ringworld.
Some of the readers have become frighteningly educated.
So it's a case then of the authors educating the readers,
and the readers then trying to stay one jump ahead of the authors.
Yeah, this is also referred to as the game.
It's a different game, but all science fiction fans play it, or large numbers of them do.
I only know about the ones who write in.
They find the flaw in the story, and then they write you about it,
or occasionally they publish it in a fanzine, and it reaches everybody.
So you'd better not make any sloppy predictions, or people are going to come down on you.
That's right, I had a couple of mistakes in the first edition of Ringworld that are still burning my ears.
What about your next book? Could you tell us a little about what it's about,
and if there's anything in the book, any place where you've tried to make some new predictions?
One thing I'm utterly safe about my predictions.
The book is called A World Out of Time, and it goes from 200 years in the future to 3 million years in the future.
So I'm unlikely to be caught in a mistake.
And just another typically little unambitious story for the average evening.
Sure. This one is highly ambitious. It's as ambitious a prediction as I've ever made.
I should say as ambitious a set of predictions.
I will tell you that by the time Corbell gets back to the solar system from the galactic core,
the solar system has been screwed around to a great extent.
The sun is too hot, Jupiter is too hot, both are too hot for theory.
The Earth is in orbit around Jupiter, Mars looks funny, Mercury looks funny, Uranus is missing.
There is something slightly smaller than Uranus, orbiting between Jupiter and Saturn,
and it all looks like they came back to the wrong system.
What happened if it's not asking you to give away the whole story?
I'm afraid it would be. I would prefer to leave you wondering.
Alright, then if everybody wants to find out why Mars and Venus look funny,
and what happened to Uranus, they're going to have to read the next book.
Larry Niven created a unique universe in his Tales of Known Space series,
and his fellow author, Alan Dean Foster, follows up on some of the ideas in it.
You've asked me, is the history I view now different from a future history I've been writing over the past 12 years?
Right.
Yes, some of my predictions were silly.
There is a story that belongs to the Known Space Cycle that has Mercury turning one face always to its sun
and gives it no atmosphere. Both of these are wrong.
A number of assumptions are wrong. I believe somewhere in there is the assumption that if the Earth didn't have a moon,
or if an Earth-like planet tried to form without a moon, it would have an atmosphere as thick and poisonous as Venus's.
That turns out not to be true.
So then sometimes you can't help yourself. You try and do the best you can with your predictions, but I'll tell you how sticky it gets.
There are four stories set on Mars, or partly in Mars, in the Known Space history.
They were written starting before the Mariner 4 circled Mars.
And the result is, I've got the history continuing, but the face of Mars keeps changing as I write these stories.
It's damn-dough-ward, isn't it?
Well, I had a choice to make, and that was the least embarrassing one as far as I could tell.
The first Mars has all those crescent dunes that we are so familiar with.
The second had craters on it. The third had not only craters, but what I might as well call Mars dust.
Dust so fine that it flows like oil.
And if they change Mars again, which they have, they have changed Mars again, and I suppose it's time for me to write another story.
Larry Niven. In a moment, his colleagues, Isaac Asimov, Lester Del Rey, Frederik Pohl, and Gordon Dickson.
You're listening to the Ballantine Science Fiction Hour.
Predictions have long been a part of the writings of Lester Del Rey.
In 1942, long before the nuclear age, his novel, Nerves, gave us an insight into what could happen if an atomic power plant went out of control.
His book, The Eleventh Commandment, reissued recently by Ballantine, deals with an overpopulated earth, again a subject of contemporary concern.
Lester Del Rey says he is puzzled by the way people throw the term hard science around without bothering to define it.
Hard science fiction is fiction basically that's written around the physical sciences, not the humanistic sciences.
There are sciences where things can be written down in exact formulae most of the time.
Physics, the theoretical aspects of astronomy, chemistry to some extent, though that isn't used as much as it might be.
Biochemistry should be used, but for some reason or other they seem to think that that's soft science and neglected or else they don't know enough about it.
Fundamentally, you might say that hard science usually involves a large degree of playing with physics,
such as trying to refute, oh, the Einstein limit on the speed of light for a spaceship, such as wondering what really does go on in the middle of a neutron star.
Invention stories to some extent are hard science fiction, that is when you try to make the invention reasonable.
Rendezvous with Rama is a superb example of hard science fiction because the entire theoretical basis behind the immense spaceship coming from outer space is laid out not in great detail,
but with enough hints so that a person who appreciates science can realize what's going on.
Joining Lester Del Rey is Isaac Asimov, the author of some 170 books, including his famous Foundation series, which won a Hugo, Science Fiction's equivalent of an Oscar.
Mr. Asimov's latest story, Bicentennial Man, appears in Stellar Science Fiction Stories number two, just published by Ballantine in paperback.
Let me say something about hard science fiction too. Hard science fiction is not about hard science. Like all fiction, hard science fiction is about people.
But hard science is used as a device to get at the people. In other words, we are writing stories about people who are involved with something that makes sense in terms of hard science.
Also taking part in this spirited discussion are two other distinguished authors, Frederik Pohl and Gordon Dickson.
Mr. Pohl is not only a writer but has been an agent and editor, and has the distinction of having won Hugo Awards as both writer and editor.
His most famous novel is The Space Merchants, a satirical treatment of what could happen if advertising agencies gained control of the world.
The best of Frederik Pohl, a collection of his short stories, is available from Ballantine.
Gordon Dickson is known for his thematic science fiction novels, of which the Dorsai! trilogy is his most famous.
His 1965 short story, "Soldier Ask Not", won him a Hugo, and he was awarded a Nebula for his novelette, "Call Him Lord", in 1966.
Ballantine is publishing his fantasy novel, The Dragon and the George, in October.
Messers Pohl and Dickson join in the debate on what hard science is and is not.